Enhancement Proposals for Typing and Alignment (#495)
OpenSourceEconomics/estimagic: docs/source/development/eep-02-typing.md

| Status     | Draft                                                            |
+------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Type       | Standards Track                                                  |
+------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Created    | 2024-05-02                                                       |
+------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Resolution |                                                                  |
+------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

## Abstract

This enhancement proposal explains how we want to adopt static typing in estimagic. The
overarching goals of the proposal are the following:

- Better discoverability and autocomplete for users of estimagic.
- Better readability of code due to type hints.
- More robust code due to static type checking and use of stricter types in internal
  functions.

Achieving these goals requires more than adding type hints. estimagic is currently
mostly [stringly typed](https://wiki.c2.com/?StringlyTyped) and full of dictionaries

> with a fixed set of required keys (e.g.

Author: True, this is less a distinction than a list of examples. I made that clearer now.

- [Robust Python](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/robust-python/9781098100650/), an
  excellent book that discusses how to design code around types and provides an
  introduction to static type checkers in Python.
- [jax enhancement proposal](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jep/12049-type-annotations.html)
  for adopting static typing. It has a very good discussion on benefits of static
  typing.
- [Subclassing in Python Redux](https://hynek.me/articles/python-subclassing-redux/)
  explains which types of subclassing are considered harmful and was very helpful for
  designing this proposal.

For a summary of the new design philosophy, see [here](design-philosophy).

## Changes for optimization

The following changes apply to all functions that are directly related to optimization,
i.e. `maximize`, `minimize`, `slice_plot`, `criterion_plot`, `params_plot`,
`count_free_params`, `check_constraints` and `OptimizeResult`.

### The objective function

#### Current situation

The objective or criterion function is the function being optimized. Currently, it is
called `criterion` in estimagic.

The `criterion` function maps a pytree of parameters into a criterion value.

> An important feature of estimagic is that the same criterion function can work for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same criterion function can work for
```
Leave benefits for the part below.

scalar, least-squares and likelihood optimizers. Moreover, a criterion function can
return additional data that is stored in the log file (if logging is active). All of
this is achieved by returning a dictionary instead of just a scalar float.

The conventions for the return value of the criterion function are as follows:

- For the simplest case, where only scalar optimizers are used, `criterion` returns a
  float or a dictionary containing the entry "value" which is a float.
- For likelihood functions, `criterion` returns a dictionary that contains at least the
  entry `"contributions"` which can be any pytree that can be flattened into a numpy
  array of floats.
- For least-squares problems, `criterion` returns a dictionary that contains at least
  the entry `"root_contributions"` which can be any pytree that can be flattened into a
  numpy array of floats.
- In any case the returned dictionary can have an arbitrary number of additional keys.
  The corresponding information will be stored in the log database (if logging is used).

> A few simple examples of valid criterion functions are:

Reviewer: Can you add a link to the docs / tutorials? IIRC, this is being used there, else may be explain a little? I found it especially confusing since you open above with *the same criterion function can work for scalar, least-squares and likelihood optimizers*, so I was trying to map into that until realizing it has nothing to do with each other.

Author: Our docs are actually not great about this. Need to change that soon. But I will explain it a bit better in the text.

```python
def sphere(params: np.ndarray) -> float:
    return params @ params

def dict_sphere(params: dict) -> float:
    return params["a"] ** 2 + params["b"] ** 2

def least_squares_sphere(params: np.ndarray) -> dict[str, Any]:
    out = {"root_contributions": params, "p_mean": params.mean(), "p_std": params.std()}
    return out
```

> **Things we want to keep**

Reviewer: Always start with the thing to keep, then add the reason.

> - The fact that `params` can be arbitrary pytrees makes estimagic flexible and popular.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allow arbitrary pytrees for the `params` argument. This makes estimagic flexible and popular.
```

>   We do not need to restrict this type in any way because flattening the pytree gives us

Reviewer: I would not explain this here, this is the goals section?

  a very precise type no matter how complicated the tree was.

> - Using the same criterion function for scalar, likelihood and least-squares optimizers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allow using the same criterion function for scalar, likelihood and least-squares optimizers. This feature
```

  makes it easy to try out and compare very different algorithms with minimal code
  changes.

> - We do not need to restrict the type of additional arguments of the criterion function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- No restrictions on the type of additional arguments of the criterion function.
```
Reason?

> - The simplest form of our criterion functions is also compatible with scipy.optimize

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Maintain compatibility with scipy.optimize when the criterion function returns a scalar.
```
Not sure whether this is correct, but in any case be explicit.

**Problems**

- Most users of estimagic find it hard to write criterion functions that return the
  correct dictionary. Therefore, they don't use the logging feature and we often get
  questions about specifying least-squares problems correctly.
- Internally we can make almost no assumptions about the output of a criterion function,
  making the code that processes the criterion output very complex and full of if
  conditions.

> - The best typing information we could get for the output of the criterion function is

Reviewer: Not sure this qualifies as a problem under the status quo (no static typing). Seems more about process / implementation, i.e., a problem with the code base conditioning on wanting to make the move.

Author: Agree. Was also redundant.

  `float | dict[str, Any]`, which is not very useful.

> - We only know if the specified criterion function is compatible with the selected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We only know whether the specified criterion function is compatible with the selected
```

>   optimizer after we evaluate it once. This means that errors for users are raised very

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  optimizer after we evaluate it once. This means that users see errors only very
```

  late.

> - While optional, in least-squares problems it is possible that a user specifies

Reviewer: I don't get this point. Seems like a consequence of wanting to use the same criterion in multiple optimizers, which you cite as a strength above? So what precisely is the problem / what do you mean with "compatible"?

Author: The thing is that in all cases it would be sufficient to specify the output at the least aggregated level. For a leas-squares problem, only the `"root_contributions"` are necessary. estimagic can then calculate the `"contributions"` and `"value"` from the `"root_contributions"`. 

However users can also provide all three dictionary entries. If they do that, we check that their calculations coincide with ours. This is what I meant by compatible but I should have called it consistent.

The problem does not come from having criterion functions that are compatible with multiple classes of optimizers but from using a dictionary as signaling device for the output type. 

This is why the preferred way of specifying least-squares problems will be:

```python
@em.mark.least_squares 
def ls_sphere(params):
    return params
```

Author: Done.

  `root_contributions`, `contributions` and `value` even though any of them could be
  constructed out of the `root_contributions`. This means we need to check that all of
  them are compatible.

> - The name `criterion` is not used very widely in the Python optimization ecosystem.

Reviewer: *So what? If it was the standard term in all of applied math and only Python was off, that would be fine, I guess. So issue is that it is only used in econ?*

Having read on, I would suggest mentioning explicitly that the transition from scipy.optimize should be as simple as possible.

Author: Changed it.

#### Proposal

The output of the criterion function becomes `float | FunctionValue`. There are
decorators that help the user to write valid criterion functions without making an

> explicit instance of `FunctionValue`.

Reviewer: Confusing without explaining at some point here what `FunctionValue` will look like.

Author: Agree, I completely rewrote that section.

The first two previous examples remain valid. The third one will be deprecated and
should be replaced by:

```python

> @em.mark.least_squares

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import estimagic as em
from estimagic import FunctionValue

@em.mark.least_squares
```

def least_squares_sphere(params: np.ndarray) -> em.FunctionValue:
    out = FunctionValue(
        residuals=params, info={"p_mean": params.mean, "p_std": params.std()}
    )
    return out
```

We can exploit this deprecation cycle to rename `root_contributions` to `residuals`
which is more in line with the literature. Similarly, `contributions` can be renamed to
`loglikes`.

Since there is no need to modify instances of `FunctionValue`, it should be immutable.

If a user only wants to express the least-squares structure of the problem without

> logging any additional information, they can only return the least-squares residuals as

Reviewer: The logging bit is incomprehensible without additional info.

Author: Agree, I hope it is clearer now.

a pytree or vector. Since the decorator was used, we know how to interpret the output.

```python
@em.mark.least_squares
def decorated_sphere(params: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
    return params
```

In this last syntax, the criterion function is implemented the same way as in existing

> least-squares optimizers (e.g. DFO-LS), which will make it very easy for new users of

Reviewer: I think this is less about the optimization algorithm than its (most popular) Python implementation?

Author: `DFO-LS` is an algorithm and a package. But I used `scipy.optimize.least_squares` as example now.

estimagic. Similarly, `em.mark.likelihood` will be available for creating criterion

> functions that are compatible with the BHHH optimizer.

Reviewer: Same.

For completeness, we can implement an `em.mark.scalar` decorator, but this will be
optional, i.e. if none of the decorators was used we'll assume that the problem is a

> scalar problem.

Reviewer: This is why the first two examples will continue to work, no? Explain as the first thing, rather than at the end.

Author: Rewritten.

```{note}
In principle, we could make the usage of the decorator optional if a `FunctionValue`
instance is returned. However, then we still would need one criterion evaluation until
we know whether the criterion function is compatible with the selected optimizer.
```

```{note}

> A more modern alternative to a `mark` decorator would be to use `typing.Annotated` to

Reviewer: Difficult to have both like in pytask?

Author: I changed the proposal. It will become possible to signal the function type purely with type hints. However, we don't need `typing.Annotated` because we simply introduce more fine grained return types (e.g. `LeastSquaresFunctionValue`. With this, the type checker can do more than if we used `typing.Annotated`.

| ------------ |
| `neldermead` |
| `bobyqa`     |

Once the user arrives at an algorithm, a subclass of `Algorithm` is returned. This class
will be passed to `minimize` or `maximize`. Passing configured instances of `Algorithm`s
will be discussed in [Algorithm Options](algorithm-options).

In practice, we would have a lot more algorithms and a lot more categories. Some
categories might be mutually exclusive, in that case the second category is omitted
after the first one is selected.

We have the following categories:

- `GradientBased` vs. `GradientFree`
- `Local` vs. `Global`
- `Bounded` vs. `Unbounded`
- `Scalar` vs. `LeastSquares` vs. `Likelihood`
- `LinearConstrained` vs. `NonlinearConstrained` vs. `Unconstrained`

Potentially, we could also offer a `.All` attribute that returns a list of all currently
selected algorithms. That way a user could for example loop over all `Bounded` and
`GradientBased` `LeastSquares` algorithms and compare them in a criterion plot.

These categories match nicely with our
[algorithm selection tutorials](https://effective-programming-practices.vercel.app/scientific_computing/optimization_algorithms/objectives_materials.html).

We can use

> [`dataclasses.make_dataclass`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/dataclasses.html#dataclasses.make_dataclass)

Reviewer 2: Hey estimagic team, nice proposal. I had a discussion with @janosg about this part. Using `make_dataclass` will not give static type support, as the type is build dynamically at runtime.

This feature is a great idea, but my guess is it will take some effort. I would tackle it the following way:

1. For every category, add a class attribute to the `Algorithm` base class (this will just be a stub)
    ```python
     class Algorithm(ABC):
         is_gradient_based: bool
         ....
    ```
2. Use `__init__subclass__` to check that a subclass sets the attribute (also validate it), e.g.:
    ```python
     class Algorithm(ABC):
         is_gradient_based: bool
         def __init_subclass__(cls, **kwargs):
                if not hasattr(cls, "is_gradient_based"):
                    raise TypeError(...)
        
                if not isinstance(cls.is_gradient_based, bool):
                    raise ValueError(...)
                
                super().__init_subclass__(**kwargs)
    ```
3. Write a script, which search for subclasses of `Algorithm` and based on the class attributes builds a static data structure as code representing the wanted tree (I mean a script which generates the corresponding python code and writes it to a file). Instead of searching, one could also register the subclasses in `__init__subclas__`
4. Add a pre-commit hook, which calls the file generating script and validates the output.
5. Add tests to ensure the generated code is valid python code (e.g. correct indentation, etc.)

Author: Hi @schroedk, welcome to estimagic and thanks for pointing this out. This is completely correct, my approach only worked in jupyter notebooks, which is not good enough. 

I think your proposal contains two separate points:
1. An approach to use a pre-commit hook to achieve static analysis and autocomplete for algorithm selection as well as filtering algorithms by category. That approach will also work in all other places where I suggested to use `make_dataclass`.
2. An alternative to the `mark.minimizer` decorator via class variables that are validated via `__init_subclass__`. 

I am completely convinced about the first point and will adjust my proposal. 

I will also add the second point as alternative to the decorator approach so we can have a discussion about the pros and cons of each idea. My main concern is that most people who have contributed algorithms to estimagic so far do not know the difference between class and instance variables but are very familiar with using decorators. It will be interesting to hear opinions on this.

  how options are handled in estimagic, we should consider just harmonizing names and
  not default values.

#### Proposal

In total, we want to offer four entry points for the configuration of optimizers:

1. Instead of passing an `Algorithm` class (as described in
   [Algorithm Selection](algorithm-selection)) the user can create an instance of their
   selected algorithm. When creating the instance, they have autocompletion for all
   options supported by the selected algorithm. `Algorithm`s are immutable.
1. Given an instance of an `Algorithm`, a user can easily create a modified copy of that
   instance by using the `with_option` method.
1. We can provide additional methods `with_stopping` and `with_convergence` that call
   `with_option` internally but provide two additional features:
   1. They validate that the option is indeed a stopping/convergence criterion.
   1. They allow to omit the `convergence_` or `stopping_` at the beginning of the
      option name and can thus reduce repetition in the option names.
1. As before, the user can pass a global set of options to `maximize` or `minimize`. We

>    continue to support option dictionaries but also allow `AlgorithmOption` objects that

Reviewer 2: It is a very good idea to have this for backwards compatibility. However, I would not show this in the documentation and rather give the user a more biased explanation for configuration (in favor of configuring the algorithms directly).

Author: Agree and added a note.

is also deprecated. Most use-cases will be covered by passing dictionaries of configured
Algorithms as optimize options. Actually using the full power of passing
`OptimizeOptions` will be rarely needed.

The return type of `run_benchmark` will be `dict[tuple[str], BenchmarkResult]`

`BenchmarkResult` is a dataclass with fields that mirror the keys of the current
dictionary. It will roughly look as follows:

```python
@dataclass
class BenchmarkResult:
    params_history: list[NDArray]
    fun_history: list[float]
    time_history: list[float]
    batches_history: list[int]
    solution: OptimizeResult
```

## Estimation

The changes to the estimation functions `estimate_ml` and `estimate_msm` will be
minimal:

- `lower_bounds` and `upper_bounds` are replaced by `bounds` (as in optimization)
- `numdiff_options` and `optimize_options` become dataclasses
- `logging` and `log_options` get aligned with our proposal for optimization

In the long run we plan a general overhaul of `MSM` estimation that provides better
access to currently internal objects such as the MSM objective function.

(design-philosophy)=

> ## Design Philosophy

Reviewer: I think this should go upfront, i.e., after "Motivation and resources". *(makes sense you wrote it last, but for a reader it is better to have upfront)*

Author: Moved it to the front, thanks!

  scalar.

**Problems**

- Most users of estimagic find it hard to write criterion functions that return the
  correct dictionary. Therefore, they don't use the logging feature and we often get
  questions about specifying least-squares problems correctly.
- Internally we can make almost no assumptions about the output of a criterion function,
  making the code that processes the criterion output very complex and full of if
  conditions.
- The best typing information we could get for the output of the criterion function is
  `float | dict[str, Any]`, which is not very useful.
- We only know whether the specified criterion function is compatible with the selected
  optimizer after we evaluate it once. This means that users see errors only very late.
- While optional, in least-squares problems it is possible that a user specifies
  `root_contributions`, `contributions` and `value` even though any of them could be
  constructed out of the `root_contributions`. This means we need to check that all of
  them are compatible.
- The name `criterion` is not used very widely in the Python optimization ecosystem.

#### Proposal

> The output of the criterion function becomes `float | FunctionValue`. There are

Author: It's actually `float | PyTree[float] | FunctionValue`.

If a user only wants to express the least-squares structure of the problem without
logging any additional information, they can only return the least-squares residuals as
a pytree or vector. Since the decorator was used, we know how to interpret the output.

```python
@em.mark.least_squares
def decorated_sphere(params: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray:
    return params
```

In this last syntax, the criterion function is implemented the same way as in existing
least-squares optimizers (e.g. DFO-LS), which will make it very easy for new users of
estimagic. Similarly, `em.mark.likelihood` will be available for creating criterion
functions that are compatible with the BHHH optimizer.

For completeness, we can implement an `em.mark.scalar` decorator, but this will be
optional, i.e. if none of the decorators was used we'll assume that the problem is a
scalar problem.

```{note}
In principle, we could make the usage of the decorator optional if a `FunctionValue`
instance is returned. However, then we still would need one criterion evaluation until
we know whether the criterion function is compatible with the selected optimizer.
```

```{note}

> A more modern alternative to a `mark` decorator would be to use `typing.Annotated` to

Author: Proposal is updated. There is a solution based on type hints but it is not using Annotated.

`"value"` column). We can exploit the current deprecation cycle to rename the current
`cov` and `sdcorr` constraints to `FlatCovConstraint` and `FlatSdcorrConstraint`. This
prepares the introduction of a more natural `CovConstraint` and `SdcorrConstraint`
later.

(algorithm-selection)=

### Algorithm selection

#### Current situation

`algorithm` is a string or a callable that satisfies the internal algorithm interface.
If the user passes a string, we look up the algorithm implementation in a dictionary
containing all installed algorithms. We implement suggestions for typical typos based on
fuzzy matching of strings.

**Problems**

- There is no autocomplete.
- It is very easy to make typos and they only get caught at runtime.
- Users cannot select algorithms without reading the documentation.

#### Difficulties

The usual solution to selecting algorithms in an autocomplete friendly way is an `Enum`.
However, there are two difficulties that make this solution suboptimal:

1. The set of available algorithms depends on the packages a user has installed. Almost
   all algorithms come from optional dependencies and very few users install all

>    optional dependencies.

Author: Yes. My proposal only provided autocomplete in jupyter notebooks which is not enough. As @schroedk pointed out, this problem is unsolvable in general.

)
minimize(
    # ...
    algorithm=algo,
    # ...
)
```

```python
# using copy constructors for better namespaces
algo = (
    em.algorithms.scipy_lbfgsb()
    .with_stopping(
        max_iterations=1000,
        max_criterion_evaluations=1500,
    )
    .with_convergence(
        relative_criterion_tolerance=1e-6,
    )
)

minimize(
    # ...
    algorithm=algo,
    # ...
)
```

```python
# using copy constructors to create variants
base_algo = em.algorithms.fides(stopping_max_iterations=1000)
algorithms = [base_algo.with_option(initial_radius=r) for r in [0.1, 0.2, 0.5]]

for algo in algorithms:
    minimize(
        # ...
        algorithm=algo,
        # ...
    )
```

```python
# option object
options = em.AlgorithmOptions(
    stopping_max_iterations=1000,
    stopping_max_criterion_evaluations=1500,
    convergence_relative_criterion_tolerance=1e-6,
    convergence_scaled_gradient_tolerance=1e-6,
    initial_radius=0.1,
    population_size=100,
)

minimize(
    # ...
    algorithm=em.algorithms.scipy_lbfgsb,
    algo_options=options,
    # ...
)
```

```{note}
In my currently planned implementation, autocomplete will not work reliably for the

> copy constructors (`with_option`, `with_stopping` and `with_convergence). The main

Author: Fixed manually.

  above.
- `None`: In this case, a numerical derivative is calculated.

The `criterion_and_derivative` argument exactly mirrors `derivative` but each callable
returns a tuple of the criterion value and the derivative instead.

**Things we want to keep**

- It is good that synergies between `criterion` and `derivative` can be exploited.
- The three arguments (`criterion`, `derivative`, `criterion_and_derivative`) make sure
  that every algorithm can run efficiently when looping over algorithms and keeping
  everything else equal. With SciPy's approach of setting `jac=True` if one wants to use
  a joint criterion and derivative function, a gradient free optimizer would have no
  chance of evaluating just the criterion.
- We want to support scalar, least-squares and likelihood problems in one interface.

**Problems**

- A dict with required keys is brittle
- Autodiff needs to be handled completely outside of estimagic
- The names `criterion`, `derivative` and `criterion_and_derivative` are not aligned
  with scipy and very long.

#### Proposal

1. We keep the three arguments but rename them to `fun`, `jac` and `fun_and_jac`.

> 1. `jac` or `fun_and_jac` can also be a string `"jax"` or a more autocomplete friendly

Author: Yes, exactly. The updated proposal contains an explicit example now.

1. The minimize function returns an `InternalOptimizeResult` instead of a dictionary.

The copy constructors (`with_option`, `with_convergence`, and `with_stopping`) are
inherited from `estimagic.Algorithm`. This means, that they will have `**kwargs` as
signature and thus do not support autocomplete. However, they can check that all
specified options are actually in the `__dataclass_fields__` and thus provide feedback
before an optimization is run.

All breaking changes of the internal algorithm interface are done without deprecation
cycle.

```{note}
The `_solve_internal_problem` method is private because users should not call it; This
also prepares adding a public `minimize` method that internally calls the
`minimize` function.
```

To make things more concrete, here are prototypes for components related to the
`InternalProblem` and `InternalOptimizeResult`.

```python
from numpy.typing import NDArray
from dataclasses import dataclass
from typing import Callable, Tuple
import estimagic as em

@dataclass(frozen=True)
class ScalarProblemFunctions:
    fun: Callable[[NDArray[float]], float]
    jac: Callable[[NDArray[float]], NDArray[float]]

>     fun_and_jac: Callable[[NDArray[float]], Tuple[float, NDArray[float]]]

Author: This is the internal problem representation, where  everything is numpy based.  It is actually a goal to be as strict as possible here because then internal algorithms can make strong assumptions and have to handle fewer cases. 

The only reason to deviate from that would be if we want to support end-to-end jax compatible (and differentiable) optimizers like the ones from jaxopt (which is now part of optax). However that would require huge changes, as everything we do inside the internal criterion function would have to be jax compatible. 

I wouldn't say it's impossible but some features (e.g. logging) would be hard or impossible and of course the user's problems would also have to be fully jax compatible (e.g. no DataFrames as params).

  is not the case are benchmark results, that are better represented as dictionaries.
- The documentation will mainly show preferred ways of doing things. Example: while
  option dictionaries are allowed in many cases, we always show how to do things in more
  autocomplete friendly ways.
- Whenever possible, use immutable types. Whenever things need to be changeable,
  consider using an immutable type with copy constructors for modified instances.
  Example: instances of `Algorithm` are immutable but using `Algorithm.with_option`
  users can create modified copies.
- The main entry point to estimagic are functions, objects are mostly used for
  configuration and return types. This takes the best of both worlds: we get the safety
  and static analysis that (in Python) can only be achieved using objects but the
  beginner friendliness and freedom provided by functions. Example: Having a `minimize`
  function, it is very easy to add the possibility of running minimizations with
  multiple algorithms in parallel and returning the best value. Having a `.solve` method
  on an algorithm object would require a whole new interface for this.

## Type checkers and their configuration

> We choose mypy as static type checker and run it as part of our continuous integration.

Reviewer 3: We could also think about running mypy using pre-commit hooks if it's not too slow. This is what JAX is doing (see their [.pre-commit-config.yaml](https://github.com/google/jax/blob/main/.pre-commit-config.yaml).

Author: Added it.

Once this enhancement proposal is fully implemented, we want to use the following
settings:

```
check_untyped_defs = true
disallow_any_generics = true
disallow_untyped_defs = true
disallow_incomplete_defs = true
no_implicit_optional = true
warn_redundant_casts = true
warn_unused_ignores = true
```

## Runtime type checking

Since most of our users do not use static type checkers we will still need to check the
type of most user inputs so we can give them early feedback when problems arise. Thus we
cannot remove our current error handling just because many of these errors could now be
caught by static analysis.

We can investigate using `jaxtyping`'s pytest hooks to enable runtime typecheckers like
beartype during testing but it is not a priority for now.

## Changes in documentation

- No type hints in docstrings anymore

> - Only show new recommended ways of doing things, not deprecated ones

Author: Added a comment with link.

`count_free_params`, `check_constraints` and `OptimizeResult`.

### The objective function

#### Current situation

The objective or criterion function is the function being optimized. Currently, it is
called `criterion` in estimagic.

The same criterion function can work for scalar, least-squares and likelihood
optimizers. Moreover, a criterion function can return additional data that is stored in
the log file (if logging is active). All of this is achieved by returning a dictionary
instead of just a scalar float.

For the simplest case, where only scalar optimizers are used, `criterion` returns a
float. Here are two examples of this simple case.

The **first example** represents `params` as a flat numpy array and returns a float.
This would also be compatible with SciPy:

```python
def sphere(params: np.ndarray) -> float:
    return params @ params
```

The **second example** also returns a float but uses a different format for the
parameters:

```python
def dict_sphere(params: dict) -> float:
    return params["a"] ** 2 + params["b"] ** 2
```

If the user wants the criterion function to be compatible with specialized optimizers

> for least-squares problems, the criterion function needs to return a dictionary. The

Reviewer 4: I don't fully understand what the specialized optimizers require. Do I understand correctly that `"p_mean"` and `"p_std"` are not required, but just the least-squares residuals in `root_contributions`. Why does the criterion function needs to return a dictionary then?

Author: Thanks! I converted the example to two examples to make it clearer. But this partially just validates my feeling that our current way of specifying least-squares problems is very hard to describe.

Reviewer 4: Thanks! Much clearer now 👍

The purpose of the decorators is to tell us the output type of the criterion function.
This is necessary because there is no way of distinguishing between likelihood and
least-squares functions from the output alone and because we want to know the function
type before we evaluate the function once.

An alternative that might be more convenient for advanced Python programmers would be to
do this via type hints. In this case, the return types need to be a bit more
fine-grained:

```python
@dataclass(frozen=True)
class ScalarFunctionValue(FunctionValue):
    value: float
    info: dict[str, Any]

@dataclass(frozen=True)
class LeastSquaresFunctionValue(FunctionValue):
    value: PyTree
    info: dict[str, Any]

@dataclass(frozen=True)
class LikelihoodFunctionValue(FunctionValue):
    value: PyTree
    info: dict[str, Any]
```

A least-squares function could then be specified without decorator as follows:

```python
from estimagic import LeastSquaresFunctionValue

def least_squares_sphere(params: np.ndarray) -> LeastSquaresFunctionValue:
    out = LeastSquaresFunctionValue(
        value=params, info={"p_mean": params.mean, "p_std": params.std()}
    )
    return out
```

> I think we can support this version on top of the decorator approach but I would not

Reviewer 4: Writing style seems off

Author: Agree, thanks. I changed it.

    )
    .with_convergence(
        relative_criterion_tolerance=1e-6,
    )
)

minimize(
    # ...
    algorithm=algo,
    # ...
)
```

```python
# using copy constructors to create variants
base_algo = em.algorithms.fides(stopping_max_iterations=1000)
algorithms = [base_algo.with_option(initial_radius=r) for r in [0.1, 0.2, 0.5]]

for algo in algorithms:
    minimize(
        # ...
        algorithm=algo,
        # ...
    )
```

```python
# option object
options = em.AlgorithmOptions(
    stopping_max_iterations=1000,
    stopping_max_criterion_evaluations=1500,
    convergence_relative_criterion_tolerance=1e-6,
    convergence_scaled_gradient_tolerance=1e-6,
    initial_radius=0.1,
    population_size=100,
)

minimize(
    # ...
    algorithm=em.algorithms.scipy_lbfgsb,
    algo_options=options,
    # ...
)
```

```{note}
In my currently planned implementation, autocomplete will not work reliably for the
copy constructors (`with_option`, `with_stopping` and `with_convergence`). The main
reason is that most editors do not play well with `functools.wraps` or any other means
of dynamic signature creation. For more details, see the discussions about the

> [Internal Algorithm Interface](algorithm-interface).

Reviewer 4: Hyperlink doesn't seem to work in this environment.

Reviewer: Syntax should be `[Internal Algorithm Interface](#algorithm-interface)`, I think.

Author: It works on [readthedcos](https://estimagic--495.org.readthedocs.build/en/495/development/eep-02-typing.html#id11) 

Which environment are you using?

Reviewer 4: Just the [preview here on GitHub](https://github.com/OpenSourceEconomics/estimagic/blob/14c92cb028cae8083a390bd5ac0d2d972cbb1830/docs/source/development/eep-02-typing.md#proposal-4)

| `stopping_max_criterion_evaluations`       | `stopping_maxfun`         | scipy      |
| `stopping_max_iterations`                  | `stopping_maxiter`        | scipy      |
| `convergence_absolute_criterion_tolerance` | `convergence_ftol_abs`    | NlOpt      |
| `convergence_relative_criterion_tolerance` | `convergence_ftol_rel`    | NlOpt      |
| `convergence_absolute_params_tolerance`    | `convergence_xtol_abs`    | NlOpt      |
| `convergence_relative_params_tolerance`    | `convergence_xtol_rel`    | NlOpt      |
| `convergence_absolute_gradient_tolerance`  | `convergence_gtol_abs`    | NlOpt      |
| `convergence_relative_gradient_tolerance`  | `convergence_gtol_rel`    | NlOpt      |
| `convergence_scaled_gradient_tolerance`    | `convergence_gtol_scaled` |            |

### Things we do not want to align

- We do not want to rename `algorithm` to `method` because our algorithm names are
  different from scipy, so people who switch over from scipy need to adjust their code
  anyways.
- We do not want to rename `algo_options` to `options` for the same reason.
- I am not sure if `params` should be renamed to `x0`. It would align estimagic more

>   with scipy, but `params` is just easier to pronounce and use as a word than `x0`.

Reviewer 4: I agree

Reviewer: Same here. Furthermore, to me `x` / `x0` gives the impression of a vector, not an arbitrary pytree.

Author: Thanks, then we have a decision. I clarified it in the text.

```

## Abstract

This enhancement proposal explains how we want to adopt static typing in estimagic. The
overarching goals of the proposal are the folloing:

- More robust code due to static type checking and use of stricter types in internal
  functions.
- Better readability of code due to type hints
- Better discoverability and autocomplete for users of estimagic

Achieving these goals requires more than adding type hints. Estimagic is currently
mostly [stringly typed](https://wiki.c2.com/?StringlyTyped) and full of dictionaries
with a fixed set of required keys (e.g.
[constraints](https://estimagic.readthedocs.io/en/latest/how_to_guides/optimization/how_to_specify_constraints.html),
[option dictionaries](https://estimagic.readthedocs.io/en/latest/how_to_guides/optimization/how_to_specify_algorithm_and_algo_options.html),
etc.).

This enhancement proposal outlines how we can accomodate the changes needed to reap the
benefits of static typing without breaking users' code in too many places.

## Motivation and ressources

- [Writing Python like it's Rust](https://kobzol.github.io/rust/python/2023/05/20/writing-python-like-its-rust.html).

>   A very good blogpost that the drawbacks of "stringly-typed" Python code and shows how

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  A very good blogpost that summarizes the drawbacks of "stringly-typed" Python code and shows how
```

  to incorporate typing philosophies from Rust into Python projects. Read this if you
  don't have time to read the other ressources.
- [Robust Python](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/robust-python/9781098100650/), an
  excellent book that discusses how to design code around types and provides an
  introduction to static type checkers in Python.
- A
  [jax enhancement proposal](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jep/12049-type-annotations.html)
  for adopting static typing. It has a very good discussion on benefits of static
  typing.
- [Subclassing in Python Redux](https://hynek.me/articles/python-subclassing-redux/)
  explains which types of subclassing are considered harmful and was very helpful for
  designing this proposal.

## Changes for optimization

The following changes apply to all functions that are directly related to optimization,
i.e. `maximize`, `minimize`, `slice_plot`, `criterion_plot`, `params_plot`,
`count_free_params`, `check_constraints` and `OptimizeResult`.

### The `criterion` function

#### Current situation

A function that takes params (a pytree) as first argument and returns a scalar (if only

> scalar algorithms will be used) or a dictionary that contains at the entries "value" (a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
scalar algorithms will be used) or a dictionary that contains the entries "value" (a
```

scalar float), "contributions" (a pytree containing the summands that make up the
criterion value of a likelihood problem) or "root_contributions" (a pytree containing
the residuals of a least-squares problem). Moreover, the dict can have any number of
additional entries. The additional dict entries will be stored in a database if logging
is used.

A few simple examples of valid criterion functions are:

```python
def sphere(params: np.ndarray) -> float:
    return params @ params

def dict_sphere(params: dict) -> float:
    return params["a"] ** 2 + params["b"] ** 2

> def least_squares_sphere(params: np.ndarray) -> dict[str:Any]:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
def least_squares_sphere(params: np.ndarray) -> dict[str, Any]:
```

    out = {"root_contributions": params, "p_mean": params.mean(), "p_std": params.std()}
    return out
```

**Things we want to keep**

- The fact that `params` can be arbitrary pytrees makes estimagic flexible and popular.
  We do not need to restrict this type in any way because flattening the pytree gives us
  a very precise type no matter how complicated the tree was.
- We do not need to restrict the type of additional arguments of the criterion function.
- The simplest form of our criterion functions is also compatible with scipy.optimize

**Problems**

- Newcomers find it hard to specify least-squares problems
- Internally we can make almost no assumptions about the output of a criterion function,
  making the code very complex and brittle
- The best typing information we could get for the output of the criterion function is

>   `float | dict[str: Any]` which is not very useful.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  `float | dict[str, Any]` which is not very useful.
```

#### Proposal

`params` and additional keyword arguments of the criterion function stay unchanged. The

> output of the criterion function becomes `float | CriterionValue`. There are decorators

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
output of the criterion function becomes `float | CriterionValue`. They are decorators
```

Author: I think that one was correct.

that help the user to write valid criterion functions without making an explicit
instance of `CriterionValue`.

The first two previous examples remain valid. The third one will be deprecated and
should be replaced by:

```python
def least_squares_sphere(params: np.ndarray) -> em.CriterionValue:
    out = CriterionValue(
        residuals=params, info={"p_mean": params.mean, "p_std": params.std()}
    )
    return out
```

We can exploit this deprecation cycle to rename `root_contributions` to `residuals`

> which is more in line with the literater.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which is more in line with the literature.
```
